CommittingChanges.md: Clarify upload versioning (#92)
canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook: CommittingChanges.md

    - Further top level bullet points for each new change made that is not a carry-over or drop from the previous delta.

> ### Version string Format

Author: Oh wait - what - also format to lower case.
Arr I have changed all occurrences to just lower the "string".

...

Also doing Format -> format in all places now

Selecting the right version for an upload sounds trivial and it often is.
In most cases it is as easy as "increment the right number", but sadly there are plenty of edge cases that one needs to be aware of.

> Please see [Version string Format](VersionStrings.md) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please see [Version string format](VersionStrings.md) for details.
```

Author: yep, have this already

### Version String Format

Selecting the right version for an upload sounds trivial and it often is.
In most cases it is as easy as "increment the right number", but sadly there are plenty of edge cases that one needs to be aware of.

> Please see [Version String Format](VersionStrings.md) for details.

Author: The caption above was the same, fixed the same way

### Version String Format

Please also see [UpdatePreparation](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/SecurityTeam/UpdatePreparation#Update_the_packaging) which was the initial base for this overview.

> While not talking about Ubuntu delta and all it implications, for overall topic awareness it is very helpful to fully read through [Debian control field "Version"](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version) as well

Reviewer 2: I'm not entirely sure what is meant by `Ubuntu delta` here. I think the part before the comma can be removed entirely.

If not, a slight grammar change:

```suggestion
While not talking about Ubuntu delta and all of its implications, for overall topic awareness it is very helpful to fully read through [Debian control field "Version"](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version) as well
```

Reviewer 3: I think its just meant to say that the debian docs don't include Ubuntu-specific details, but I agree its worded confusingly. Here's another idea for rewording:
```suggestion
While Debian docs won't include Ubuntu specificities, it is helpful to fully read through [Debian control field "Version"](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version) for overall topic awareness.
```

#### Version: Adding a change in Ubuntu

> Most version changes, except _upstream merges_, will follow this format when adding a change in Ubuntu:

Reviewer 3: Should there be a link here to a definition of _upstream merges_ and why they are a special case?

Reviewer 3: Aha that is defined below. We might be able to add a link to that header, or add a parenthetical "...upstream merges (described later in this document)..."

Author: This section was simplified (and extended with much more slow starting context) not yet hinting at the complex truth that comes later.

> | Previous version             | Recommended version                           |

Reviewer 3: This table essentially always recommends bumping the Y in `ubuntuX.Y`. But if we never bump the X, then how could we end up with a version like `2.0-2ubuntu2` ever?

I added another related question later on, but the general question is "when do we bump X and when do we bump Y in `ubuntuX.Y`?"

Author: You and James asked for this indirectly above, the sections that explain this and more now exist.
TL;DR: non-SRU uploads

#### Version: Adding a change in the current Ubuntu development release

As shown above `[upstream_version]-[debian_revision]ubuntu[ubuntu_revision]` is the basic pattern.
Therefore depending on the fact if a package already has an Ubuntu change one would append `ubuntu1` as an Ubuntu suffix.
Or if there already was an Ubuntu change increment the suffix like `ubuntu1 -> ubuntu2`.

> Example situation: _Adding a change to `3.3.0-1` in the Ubuntu development release will use `3.3.0-1ubuntu1`_

> Example situation: _Adding another change to `3.3.0-1ubuntu1` in the Ubuntu development release will use `3.3.0-1ubuntu2`_

Changes in the development release will always add or increment the number that directly follows the `ubuntu` string.
The potentially existing subsequent numbers have special meaning, see _Stable release updates_ below.

| Previous version             | Recommended version   |
| ---------------------------- | --------------------- |
| 2.0-2                        | 2.0-2ubuntu1          |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2                 | 2.0-2ubuntu3          |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1               | 2.0-2ubuntu3          |
| 2.0-2build1                  | 2.0-2ubuntu1          |

> | 2.0                          | 2.0ubuntu1            |

Author: As you learn below this is a native package, this is actually one of four valid answers depending whose native pkg it is and where you upload. I'll remove the line here entirely and refer to read that section I added later.

| 2.0-2 in two releases        | 2.0-2ubuntu0.11.10.1 and 2.0-2ubuntu0.12.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu1 in two releases | 2.0-2ubuntu1.11.10.1 and 2.0-2ubuntu1.12.04.1 |

> For example, suppose the current version in bionic is `3.3.0-1` and the current version in cosmic is `3.3.0-1ubuntu1`.

Reviewer 2: I know you didn't write this section, but this entire section along with the table is very confusing to a new-comer. I had to read it like 4 times to figure out what it's trying to say. It doesn't talk about context at all. Just "if this is your old version, here's the new version". But when? Are we talking about devel vs SRU vs backports? Is `cosmic` supposed to be the devel release in this case? It should clearly state that these are version changes in an *already released series*.

It's good you added the link to the debian versioning, but first I think there needs to be an introduction to the `ubuntuX` convention before jumping into this section. The next section you added `Merging from Debian` should probably come first.

Reviewer 3: I agree. I think we need a short "sequel" to the debian version docs up at the beginning of the section, where we describe what Ubuntu adds. e.g. something explaining "Debian has `[epoch:]upstream_version[-debian_revision]` and Ubuntu is downstream of Debian so we add more parts to get `[epoch:]upstream_version[-debian_revision][ubuntuX.Y]` where `ubuntuX.Y` gets added when .... and X and Y mean ....".

Author: Yeah, for all new sections I added "Example situation" which is way more concise and always follows exactly the related explanation above. Let me rewrite this older section in the same style and add a little intro above (again just like my new sections have it).

Ok, now this section is also explanation -> example -> table.

I should have known what I signed up for trying to make this more helpful, writing it "correctly" and without the problems you had also needs sections for all other cases that are not explained. I tried to just go from what we had to the different backports. But your question made me realize that we also need all others like native packages and no change rebuilds.

I hope I haven't made too many mistakes in those sections. Just a warning, you correctly asked "this is good, but then it misses", but by iterating on making those correct and non-lacking the whole will be a much longer read. I hope that is then not ending up too distracting.

Versions in bionic should always be "lower" than versions in cosmic so that upgrading to cosmic uses the cosmic version of the package.
In this case, we can use `3.3.0-1ubuntu0.1` for a Bionic SRU.

#### Version: Merging from Debian

If Ubuntu has delta to the package from Debian it can not be
[automatically synced](https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook/blob/main/Syncs.md#why-a-sync-is-better).
In that case a Ubuntu developer usually regularly [merges the delta](https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook/blob/main/PackageMerging.md#merging)
that is in Ubuntu with the content from Debian and indirectly also with the changes by upstream.

> The version for the new upload to the Ubuntu development is the version from Debian with a suffix of `ubuntu1`

Reviewer 3: See my question on the table above. Why do we recommend `ubuntu1` here but above in the table we recommend `ubuntu0.1`?

Author: This was already fixed by splitting and adding separate sections for "Adding a change in the current Ubuntu development release" and "Adding a change in Ubuntu as a stable release update"

> > Example situation: _Uploading `3.1` to Ubuntu -Devel based with Ubuntu detla rebased onto Debian `3.1-2`_

Reviewer 3: typo
```suggestion
> Example situation: _Uploading `3.1` to Ubuntu -Devel based with Ubuntu delta rebased onto Debian `3.1-2`_
```

Author: Fixed

|        | Old          | New          |
| ------ | ------------ | ------------ |
| Debian | 2.1-1        | 3.1-2        |
| Devel  | 2.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-2ubuntu1 |

#### Version: Merging from Upstream

The mentioned special case of an _upstream merge_ is triggering when Ubuntu goes ahead of Debian merging directly from
upstream. In this case the new version shall:

* reflect that it was not yet packaged in Debian (at this point in time) and thereby is not _really_ based on a Debian version by using `-0` as the Debian version suffix.
* represent that there are Ubuntu changes via `ubuntu1` which also serves as a place increment for further uploads to the development release

> Example situation: _Uploading `3.1` to Ubuntu -Devel while Debian is not yet at `3.1`_

|        | Old          | New          |
| ------ | ------------ | ------------ |
| Debian | 2.1-1        | _unchanged_  |

> | Devel  | 2.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.0-0ubuntu1 |

Reviewer 2: Since we're uploading `3.1`, new should be `3.1-0ubuntu1`, right?

Author: Hmm, yeah the tables are never super closely related to the examples in my mind.
I still fixed it to be less confusing and also completed  the example above to be more self contained.

#### Version: Backport from upstream

> There are more special cases, especially related to backports (As in backports of new versions via SRU, not as in https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UbuntuBackports).

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the parenthetical!

In the rare case of a _new upstream release being pushed to all stable releases_
it will lose all its former version suffix. This is a common practice on some
minor release exception processes, where we pick up the most recent upstream
content, but avoid regressions/changes due to packaging changes like moving files,
splitting or removing binary packages etc. To represent that the upload should:

> * Signal that it is not based on, a potentially existing, Debian version of the same by using `-0` as the Debian packaging revision

Reviewer 2: Not sure what `a potentially existing` means here

Author: If we'd pick 3.1-1 here then 3.1-1 might now or later exist in Debian.
But that is not what this upload is based on.
Hence the 3.1-1 might "potentially exist", so we pick 3.1-0 to make it clear.

Rephrased to "Signal that it is not based on a Debian packaging version by using `-0` as the Debian packaging revision" and also introduced "Debian packaging revision" a bit better above.

|       | Old          | New                  |
| ----- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| LTS   | 2.0-2        | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| LTS+1 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.10.1 |

The new version is independent to the former version of the target release, here an example for 22.04:

| Previous       | New upstream | Upload for LTS       |
| -------------- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| 2.0-2          | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2   | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1 | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2build1    | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |

#### Version: Backport from Ubuntu devel

But if instead the backport is actually without _meaningful sourceful
differences_ to what is in the current Ubuntu development release (a common
practice for some packages that keep the same version everywhere) with only
minimal backporting adaptations it would instead:

* Signal that is it basically _identical but backported_ by starting with the same version as the one in the development release
* Add a `~` to ensure it sorts earlier than the version in -devel
* Add a suffix per Ubuntu release like `22.04`

> * Add an increment that can be used in subsequent individual per release SRU uploads like `.1`

Reviewer 3: u-a-t found this final `.1` to be unhelpful since it was rare for a bug to only affect one Ubuntu release, so we dropped it. We could still add a `.1` in that rare case where we'd rather do a release-specific patch instead of delivering a fix to all releases. We might be unique though and not sure if that detail is worth adding here.

Author: yeah, you are special and I think adding "situations when to consider not doing so" makes this even more pain to read.
Thanks for the thought though.

> > Example situation: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1ubuntu2`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Example situation: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1-1ubuntu2`_
```

Author: Ack, fixed

| -------------- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| 2.0-2          | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2   | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1 | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2build1    | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |

Note: If in this case the package in Ubuntu development release is native one
would still use _the same version_ as in the development release.

> Example situation: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1`_

|       | Old          | New         |
| ----- | ------------ | ----------- |
| LTS   | 2.0-2        | 3.1~22.04.1 |
| LTS+1 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1~22.10.1 |

#### Version: Undoing mistakes

In a very rare case where an upgrade to a new upstream version of a package
caused major regression and the only way out is rolling back, the convention is
to insert `+really` followed by the actual version number.

To be clear, both should be used sparingly and only if really needed.
Please also have a look at [+really in control fields](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#epochs-should-be-used-sparingly).

> > Example situation: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1`_

Reviewer 3: This looks copy/pasted without updating
```suggestion
> Example situation: _Uploading `3.1` caused a regression, so rolling back to the previous version_
```

Author: Good catch, fixed - but context has changed a bit

| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1               | 2.0-2ubuntu2.2                                |
| 2.0-2build1                  | 2.0-2ubuntu0.1                                |
| 2.0                          | 2.0ubuntu0.1                                  |
| 2.0-2 in two releases        | 2.0-2ubuntu0.11.10.1 and 2.0-2ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu1 in two releases | 2.0-2ubuntu1.11.10.1 and 2.0-2ubuntu1.22.04.1 |

#### Version: native packages

Looking at scheme of `[upstream_version]-[debian_revision]ubuntu[ubuntu_revision]` might make you wonder, what if Debian or Ubuntu are the upstream

> Then the first element in the scheme would make no sense?

Author: I improved the wording with something in between what both of us had - thanks!

Right this is due to the classification as _native_ or _non-native_ package as outlined by the referred [Debian control field version](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version) and in more detail [Debian source packages](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-source.html#s-source-packages).
To quote "Presence of the debian_revision part indicates this package is a non-native package. Absence indicates the package is a native package."

This continues into native Ubuntu packages, where the presence or lack of `ubuntu[ubuntu_revision]` marks if a package is native to Ubuntu or was already present in Debian.

> > Example situation: _A package native to Debian (no `-`), getting an Ubuntu change in the devel release `39.3 -> 39.3ubuntu1`

Reviewer 2: Don't forget to end with `_` to make the italics work.

Author: Good catch, fixed

> > Example situation: _A package native to Ubuntu (no `-`) and no `ubuntuX` getting an Ubuntu change in the devel release `39.3 -> 39.4`

Reviewer 2: Don't forget to end with `_` to make the italics work.

Author: Good catch

Yes that means, from just the version, you can not differentiate between a _native Debian package that was synced_ and a _native package in Ubuntu_

> | Previous version       | Devel upload  |  SRU upload   |

Reviewer 2: This table isn't rendering properly.

Author: Found and fixed - thank you!

Ubuntu continuously [syncs](https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook/blob/main/Syncs.md#why-a-sync-is-better) changes from Debian
until the [Debian import freeze](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/DebianImportFreeze) date is met, then this is deactivated to stabilize the upcoming Ubuntu release.
As outlined there _" will be automatically imported from Debian where they have not been customized for Ubuntu, that is when the version number of the
package in the current Ubuntu development branch does not contain the substring _ubuntu"_.
And as we learned above adding a change in Ubuntu will add a `ubuntuX` suffix, which prevents that sync.

So what if one needs to rebuild a package, for example due to a libarary transition to build against new versions of other packages,
but does not want to prevent future automatic syncing from Debian?
Well, just rebuilding is not considered a change that has to be retained, so in this special case one would:

* Not add `ubuntuX` and instead add a `buildX` suffix.
* If there is already one such `buildX` suffix present, increment it.
* If there is already a `ubuntuX` suffix there would be no auto-sync anyway, so increment the existing suffix

> > Example situation: _A Debian package 3.1-3 needs a rebuild in Ubuntu `3.1-3 -> 3.1-3build1`

Reviewer 2: Don't forget to end with `_` to make the italics work.

Author: Good catch, fixed

| 2.0-2build1                  | 2.0-2build2                   |
| 2.0 (native in Debian)       | 2.0build1                     |
| 2.0 (native in Ubuntu)       | 2.1                           |

It is unlikely, but possible that one needs a no change rebuild as part of a [Stable release update](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/StableReleaseUpdates),
but in this situation auto-syncing isn't active anyway and the need for upgradability apply.
So a no-change-rebuild in regard to picking a version number in this case is identical to any other change
(see the section _Adding a change in Ubuntu as a stable release update_ above)

#### Version: Backport from upstream

There are more special cases, especially related to backports (As in backports of new versions via SRU, not as in https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UbuntuBackports).

In the rare case of a _new upstream release being pushed to all stable releases_
it will lose all its former version suffix. This is a common practice on some
minor release exception processes, where we pick up the most recent upstream
content, but avoid regressions/changes due to packaging changes like moving files,

> splitting or removing binary packages etc. To represent that the upload should:

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
splitting or removing binary packages etc. To represent this the upload should:
```
